---
title: "Vim for rails developers: indenting code"
description: a quick tip on how you can indent your code preserving the cursor position
keywords: lucapette, vim, rails, indenting code, tip, map, mapping 
categories:
- vim
- rails
layout: blog
---
I use Vim mainly to write code and, in order to maintain some sanity, I like my
code indented. I like to have a mapping for indenting the entire file I'm
editing. My first attempt to solve this simple problem was:

{% highlight vim %}
map   <silent> <F5> gg=G<CR>
imap  <silent> <F5> <Esc> gg=G<CR>
{% endhighlight%}

When I pressed  &#060;f5&#062;, both in normal and insert mode, I got all the
current file indented.
The process is very simple, basically it works in the following way:

* *gg* 
<a href="http://vimdoc.sourceforge.net/htmldoc/motion.html#gg">go to first line</a>
* *=G* 
<a href="http://vimdoc.sourceforge.net/htmldoc/change.html#=">indent</a> until <a href="http://vimdoc.sourceforge.net/htmldoc/motion.html#G">G</a> that is the <a href="http://vimdoc.sourceforge.net/htmldoc/motion.html">motion</a> parameter of the *&#061;* command.

Well this was cool. It just worked fine and made all the current file
indented. I was used to the just mentioned mappings for a long time but,
recently, I was annoyed by a little issue this mapping had. Practically, when I
pressed  &#060;f5&#062; I lost the cursor position and I didn't like that. So, yesterday
I reached the WTF point and decided to solve this problem. After a few
attempts with the <a href="http://vimdoc.sourceforge.net/htmldoc/motion.html#jumplist">jumplist</a> and with the <a href="http://vimdoc.sourceforge.net/htmldoc/motion.html#changelist">changelist</a>, I found a solution I really like.
Eventually, I came up with the following:

{% highlight vim %}
map   <silent> <F5> mmgg=G`m^
imap  <silent> <F5> <Esc> mmgg=G`m^
{% endhighlight%}

that works exactly as the prevoius solution but, in addition, it brings the
cursor back where it was before you pressed  &#060;f5&#062;. Now I use the <a href="http://vimdoc.sourceforge.net/htmldoc/motion.html#mark">mark</a> command, and
the sequence is:

* *mm*
Put the current position in the _m_ mark.
* *gg* 
As the previous solution.
* *=G* 
Here too.
* *`m*
Bring the cursor to the position stored in the _m_ mark.
* *^*
Go to <a href="http://vimdoc.sourceforge.net/htmldoc/motion.html#^">the first non-blank character of the line</a>.

So, nothing magic but useful. And I'd be glad to see other possible solutions.

*Update:*

Thanks to a comment below, the above mentioned mapping can be refactored in the
following way:

{% highlight vim %}
map   <silent> <F5> mmgg=G'm
imap  <silent> <F5> <Esc> mmgg=G'm
{% endhighlight%}

Indeed, I've already "updated":https://github.com/lucapette/vimfiles/commit/9c1bafee15be2a4b47e3421e0537ff9ed1e3fb4f my vimrc.
